We're back in, we just got done
doing a binary search tree.
We did the actual finding of it,
we explained how insertion and deletion,
some of the problems that go with it.
We're back in, we're feeling ready,
we're very, very, very excited.
At least, I am super excited.
And then I forgot to do this,
we already talked about that actually,
we need to do all that.
So we're gonna move on
to our next structure.
No, we're not gonna be doing any bouncing
of a tree cuz of course, like I said,
it's a very long operation.
And I think that you if we were to
do a follow up course with this,
we'd probably cover things
like tree rotations, and
other fun trees that
we're not covering here.
So I always make this joke,
if you just say the word priority queue,
I'm gonna hire you in an interview.
I just wanna hear you say that phrase
because those things are useful.
I know it's a joke, but it's not a joke,
but it's definitely not really a joke.
Is that really a joke?
And so
this is a very important data structure,
it's often referred to as a heap or
binary priority queue.
And a simple way to put this is that it's
a binary tree in which every child or
grandchild is smaller,
that's called the max heap, or larger,
that's a min heap, than the current node.
Meaning that whenever a node is added,
we must adjust the tree.
And whenever a node is deleted,
You don't traverse this tree,
though we could traverse the tree,
you don't traverse the tree.
And it'd be actually extremely simple to
traverse it in breadth first ordering.
So you don't even need a data
structure at that point to do it,
it's already in that order.
So let's first go over
what a heap really is.
So I'm gonna restate it, but
this time with sweet circles and arrows.
So I'm just gonna put a value,
50, let's start with a min heap.
So a min heap means that the top
value must be the smallest.
Obviously, if you have duplicates,
say we had more 50s,
they could be children of 50,
that's just fine.
But that means both of
these must be larger, so
I can put something like 71,
I can put something here like 100.
Now here's where the ordering
gets a little bit goofy.
I can have children here,
which they have to be larger than 71,
so we can put it say as 101, and
we can put this one as 80, right?
Now, you're probably thinking, well,
shouldn't that be right there?
Well, no, it shouldn't be right there
cuz heaps maintain a weak ordering,
meaning that they are ordered, but
it's not perfectly ordered, right?
It's not in order of anything specific,
but there is a rule at every single point.
And so, if we were to do some right here,
we could have 200, and
we could also have 101, right?
And it is fine, just as long as it
keeps on getting larger as we go.
And so,
what this is called is the heap condition.
The heap condition effectively states,
if it is a min heap,
that every node below me must be
larger than or technically equal to.
If it's a max heap, it states that every
node below me must be smaller than or
equal to.
Cuz obviously, a max heap means
the maximum item is the root,
a min heap means the minimum
item is the root.
And so, this means if we needed
the smallest item out of this tree,
it's really simple, it's right there,
it's at the tippity top.
We could grab that item, or
we could pick it at least at over 1.
So it's super super fast to be able to
inspect and say, that's the smallest item.
Obviously, we couldn't get the median very
easily right now because we don't actually
have that available.
There is a trick to get
the median if you use two heaps.
We're not gonna do that, it's a stupid
Google interview question and
doesn't really show you anything other
than you can say the word priority queue.
All right, so now that we have that,
let's think about how we would
add a node to the stream.
Now one condition I didn't say is,
is it always complete like this?
Yes, a binary tree or heap is usually
full or complete tree, meaning
that it's always adding from left to
right, and it never has any empty spaces.
That would never exist in a heap because
that is an empty space, meaning,
there is nothing on the left-hand side,
that just does not exist.
So every single node is filled in from the
left to the right, always tree level, and
it's always complete at each level,
right, there's no gaps, there's no holes.
All right, so now that we did that,
we can kind of go on.
So how would we add a new node?
Well, the simplest way to put it is that
we go to the final spot in our tree, and
we add the node.
So let's say this node value is 3.
All right, we've added 3,
is our heap condition ordered?
To min heap, and that's definitely
really small, so the answer is no,
of course it's not.
So what do we do?
Well, we just have to bubble up,
we say hey, am I smaller than my parent?
I am, okay, so let's swap us.
This becomes 101, this becomes 3.
We do it again,
am I smaller than my parent?
I am, so this becomes 3, this becomes 71.
Am I smaller than my parents?
Yes, I am.
Now the root becomes 3 and
this one becomes 50.
Is our heap now correct?
Yes, it is.
And we can do this again,
we can simply add to the next spot and
do the same bubbling up as we go.
Let's just say we added 200.
And so we don't have to do any
bubbling at all, we're good,
we're larger than our parents, so
therefore, we do not bubble up.
Awesome, but what about deleting?
Deleting is, we do have one question.
>> Sorry, is this a doubly
linked list implicitly then?
Or how would you establish
the relationship between 100 and
the new red node?
>> So the question was is this
a doubly linked list implicitly?
Or how's it?
Or what's happening?
How do you establish that
parent child relationship?
The answer is sort of.
I'll show you here in a moment,
we'll get there cuz that part is just,
[SOUND] right, it's fantastic.
So it's gonna use a data structure we've
already created as our backing data
structure, we only just simply
understand it in a certain way.
It's beautiful.
All right, so how do we delete?
We have 3 at the top, we want our
most minimum item out of this heap.
Well, let's go like this.
We now remove 3, we're gonna return 3, but
now we have a hole in our tree, right?
The top node is empty, so what do we do?
Well, we take our very
last node in the tree,
we delete that out, and
we put it at the top.
Now, we need to heapify down, right?
So, we bubbled it up or heapify up,
now we need to heapify down to
put it back into a correct spot.
So, what do we do?
Well, since we're using a min heap,
we're gonna wanna take the minimum of
the two children and compare against that.
So what's smaller, 50 or 100?
Clearly, 50 is smaller than 100.
So is 200 greater than
the smallest of our two children?
Yes, it is.
So let's swap.
50 takes its rightful place as
head of the queue, 200 goes here.
We do it again.
We take the smallest of our two ,which
is 71 or 81, it's 71, so we do it again.
So let's do that.
So is this thing larger?
Yes, it is larger, so swap.
71 makes it all the way up here and
200 goes right here.
Again, we do one last time, and
of course 200 and 101 will be swap.
I'm out of room at this point,
and this becomes 200.
Now notice that we still maintain that
property where we fill things in from
left to right, there is no gaps and
our heap condition has been maintained.
Every node that is below any other
node must be larger than or equal to.
All right, that's pretty fancy.
So now hopefully,
if you've been following along thus far,
you're probably thinking,
that sounds great now, but
how the hell do you get this node, right?
I'd have to traverse my tree to know where
the next node needs to be added, right?
It would actually be really, really hard
to know that answer given how we built
trees thus far, which is like a node
based data structure, correct?
Yeah, it would be really, really hard.
So let's not do that.
Let's not do that at all.
We need to kind of reimagine
how we can store a tree.
This is reimagining by the way, and
that's the light bulb going off.
[LAUGH] All right, fantastic.
So let's put an index to
each one of our nodes.
So this one is 0, 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Okay, do we see anything going on here?
Do we see anything?
Why start at 0?
Wow, that sounds a lot
like an array prime,
that's because it could very
well be an array prime.
So let's think about this.
If we could store this in an array, then
50 could just be in the 0 position, right?
Then the next two children which is 71,
and what's the other side?
100, this side, what is that one?
101, 80, 200, no,
running out of space.
200, 101, and then I think the last one,
which I forgot to put a number by,
which would be 7,
would be right here, 200 again.
So, look at that.
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
7 for 200, 7 for 200.
That worked out, we were able to
put it correctly into an array.
>> This would be implemented in an array?
>> This would be implemented in an array.
So we'll technically could
implement it in an array list.
I mean, you can see why here in just one
second, because that way it's growable.
All you have to build an array
list is a growable amount,
because you don't know how many items
are gonna be in the heap, right?
So they can keep on inserting items,
you're gonna have to keep on growing
the underlying data structure.
So great.
We found a way to store it,
but now the obvious question,
how do you do parent/child relationship,
right?
There is no next, there is no previous,
there is no left, there is no right,
there is no parent, how do you do it?
All right, well,
I'm pretty sure we could come up with
a formula to be able to do this.
So we could do this fun game where
we try to guess our way there,
or I can just tell you.
So let's just look at this one right here.
2 has a child of 5 and 6,
so I can say 2 multiplied,
whatever my index is,
+1 is the right-hand side, correct?
2 times 2 is 4, plus 1 is 5.
I can do 2i + 2 to be the right-hand side,
2 times 2 is 4 plus 2 is 6.
But you're saying I don't know if
this shenanigan does it really
actually pan out?
So that'd be 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, right?
That would be the next set of children
in the placement if we were to do that.
So 6 would have a children of 13 and 14.
So let's find out.
6 times, what's this, it's not i,
it'd be 2(6) because that is i,
+ 1 should be equal to 13,
simple inspection, 13.
2(6) + 2 should be equal to 14,
it's 14, awesome.
Look at that, we just found a way to math
ourselves into our children's area, right?
I don't know how to describe that,
we've traversed to our children, right?
That is actually pretty dang incredible,
cuz there's no links, right,
there's no management of links.
So in some sense, it makes management
of this data structure way, way easier,
cuz you don't have to be, okay,
my parent, crap, I delete the wrong one,
my data is gone, okay,
let's rework this, right?
You don't have to do any of that
because it makes it so much simpler.
But we still have a problem,
we have solved the generic case for
going downwards, but we haven't solved
the generic case for going upwards.
So to 2i + 1, 2i + 2.
Now we could go like this,
okay, if my index is odd,
therefore I could do a left-hand
equation to jump up.
Or if my index is even,
I could do a right-hand equation.
I just picked a number,
I don't actually even know, it's true,
it true based on here,
that is right-hand side, perfect.
So that would have worked out, we could
do some sort of, case statement for
the parent, but
we don't actually need to do that.
We can think of it as a single equation.
Now, in real programming languages that
aren't JavaScript, when you divide
an integer by another integer,
you don't get a floating point number.
So sorry, Python,
you actually get an integer, correct?
So 5 divided by 2 is 2,
this is just saying,
it's a very important concept here.
So let's try this out.
Let's try the idea of i- 2, obviously,
not 2, what, -1 divided by 2.
So let's go back to our six case of 13 and
14.
So that means we'd have
14- 1 divided by 2.
Well, that's 13 divided by 2.
Again, real programming language,
that equals 6, right,
because we don't include the 0.5.
There we go.
So in other words,
since we're using JavaScript,
we'll need to do the floor operation.
We'll have to floor out
the value to get that,.
Which means if we did same thing,
but we did 13,
13-1 divided by 2 is the same thing as
12 divided by 2, which is clearly 6.
So both 13 and 14 can go up to 6
by doing this formula right here.
And so now we had just done both the
child, the right-hand, the left-hand, and
a generic parent calculation,
and now we can traverse our list.
But there is one more problem,
how do we get the end node?
The length, just keep track of how
many items you have in your queue and
that will be literally where you
need to insert into your array.
[SOUND] All right,
like we've solved all the problems.
That means we heapifyDown,
we start at 0 because we're always
gonna be deleting the head.
We heapifyUp,
always starting at our length.
We already know these two things, so
we'll know the indices to start with,
which means we can actually write them,
and do all that.
So that is pretty dang incredible, right?
It's actually not all that hard.
There is one more operation that we
won't be doing today, but we will be
covering later cuz it greatly affects how
an algorithm runs, which is updating.
So, if you ever want to update a node,
update a value in a priority queue,
you really have to keep track of every
single node with a value to index or
index to value, kind of hash map.
That way you can say,
hey, I'm 17, where am I?
I'm right here.
Okay, therefore,
let's bubble me up or bubble me down,
because I'm gonna change my
value from 17 to 25, right?
So we're gonna need to know how
do we bubble ourselves in that.
So that one just adds a lot
of complexity to it, but
it will also make some algorithms
way faster if we can do that.
Typically, priority queues you usually
don't consider update as something you do,
but in this case, we could.
So does that make sense?
Do we feel like we have a heap
all heaped up in our brain?
This is like the funnest data structure,
I think of them all.
It's really, really kinda crazy,
it definitely makes you think about
the world completely different, right?
We've always been doing this node,
node, node, node, node, node.
Hey, let's not do it,
let's just imagine what an array could be.
I just think that is just super cool.
All right, just really prioritizes
my queue, if you know what I mean.
All right, so [LAUGH] that's a weird joke.
Anyways, this thing is self-balancing,
right, it always maintains a perfectly
balanced binary tree, cuz we're only
really removing or adding right at where
the length is, and then bubbling
it up into the correct position.
It can be used for priority,
so think of thread scheduling,
think of all the great stuff right there.
And of course, it's the funnest data
structure to implement, easy to get wrong,
but still the funnest one to do.